Chapter 4 of The Time Machine by H.G. Wells.
This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
That's L-I-B-R-I-V-O-X dot O-R-G.
The Time Machine by H.G. Wells, Chapter 4.
In another moment, we were standing face to face.
I and this fragile thing out of futurity.
He came straight up to me and laughed into my eyes.
The absence from his bearing of any sign of fear struck me at once.
Then he turned to the two others who were following him,
and spoke to them in a strange and very sweet liquid tongue.
There were others coming, and presently a little group of perhaps eight or ten of these exquisite creatures
were about me. One of them addressed me.
It came into my head, oddly enough, that my voice was too harsh and deep for them.
So I shook my head, and pointing to my ears, shook it again.
He came a step forward, hesitated, and then touched my hand.
Then I felt the other soft little tentacles upon my back and shoulders.
They wanted to make sure I was real.
There was nothing in this at all alarming. Indeed, there was something in these pretty little people
that inspired confidence, a graceful gentleness, a certain childlike ease.
And besides, they looked so frail that I could fancy myself flinging the whole dozen of them about like nine pins.
But I made a sudden motion to warn them when I saw their little pink hands filling at the Time Machine.
Happily then, when it was not too late, I thought of a danger I had hitherto forgotten.
And reaching over the bars of the Time Machine, I unscrewed the little levers that would set it in motion
and put these in my pocket.
Then I turned again to see what I could do in the way of communication.
The people looking more nearly into their features, I saw some further peculiarities
in their Dresden China type of prettiness.
Their hair, which was uniformly curly, came to a sharp end at the neck and cheek.
There was not the faintest suggestion of it on the face, and their ears were singularly minute.
The mouths were small with bright red, rather thin lips, and the little chins ran to a point.
The eyes were large and mild, and this may seem egotism on my part.
I fancied even that there was a certain lack of the interest I might have expected in them.
As they made no effort to communicate with me, but simply stood round me smiling and speaking
in soft, cooing notes to each other, I began the conversation.
I pointed to the Time Machine and to myself, then hesitating for a moment how to express time.
I pointed to the sun.
At once, a quite pretty little figure in cheered purple and white followed my gesture
and then astonished me by imitating the sound of thunder.
For a moment I was staggered, though the impart of his gestures was plain enough.
The question had come into my mind abruptly.
Were these creatures fools?
You may hardly understand how it took me.
You see, I had always anticipated that the people of the year eight hundred and two thousand odd
would be incredibly in front of us in knowledge, art, everything.
Then one of them suddenly asked me a question that showed him to be on the intellectual level
of one of our five-year-old children.
Asked me, in fact, if I had come from the sun in a thunderstorm.
It let loose a judgment I had suspended upon their clothes, their frail light limbs and fragile features.
A flow of disappointment rushed across my mind.
For a moment I felt that I had built the Time Machine in vain.
I nodded, pointed at the sun, and gave them such a vivid rendering of thunder clap as startled them.
They all withdrew a pace or so and bowed.
Then came one laughing towards me, carrying a chain of beautiful flowers altogether new to me,
and put it about my neck.
The idea was received with the melodious applause, and presently they were all running to and fro for flowers
and laughingly flinging them upon me until I was almost smothered with blossom.
You who have never seen the like can scarcely imagine what delicate and wonderful flowers
countless years of culture had created.
Then someone suggested that their playing should be exhibited in the nearest building,
and so I was led past the sphinx of white marble which had seemed to watch me all the while
with a smile at my astonishment towards a vast gray edifice of the fretted stone.
As I went with them, the memory of my confidence, anticipation of a profound grave and intellectual posterity came
with merriment to my mind.
The buildings had a huge entry, and was altogether of the colossal dimensions.
I was naturally most occupied with the growing crowd of little people,
and with the big open ports that yawned before me, shadowy and mysterious,
my general impression of the world I saw over their heads was a tangled waste of beautiful bushes and flowers.
A long neglected and yet weedless garden I saw a number of tall spikes of strange white flowers
measuring a foot perhaps across the spread of the waxen petals.
They grew scattered as if wild among the vegetated shrubs,
but as I say I did not examine them closely at this time.
The time machine was left deserted on the turf among the rodendras.
The arc of the doorway was richly carved, but naturally I did not observe the carving very narrowly,
though I fancied I saw suggestions of old Phoenician decorations as I passed through,
and it struck me that they were very badly broken and weather worn.
Several more brightly clad people met me in the doorway, and so we entered.
I dressed in the dingy 19th century garment, looking grotesque enough,
garlanded with flowers and surrounded by an eddying mass of bright soft colored robes
and shining white limbs in a melodious whirl of laughter and laughing speech.
The big doorway opened into a proportionally great hall hung with brown.
The roof was in shadow, and the windows, partially glazed with colored glass and partially unglazed,
admitted a tempered light.
The floor was made up of huge blocks of some very hard white metal, not plates nor slabs, blocks,
and it was so much worn that I channeled along the more frequent ways.
Traversely to the length were innumerable tables, more of slabs of polished stone,
raised perhaps a foot from the floor, and upon these were heaps of fruits,
some I recognized as a kind of hypertrenical redsberry and orange, but for the most part they were strange.
Between the tables were scattered a great number of cushions.
Upon these my conductors seated themselves, signing for me to do likewise.
With a pretty absence of ceremony they began to eat the fruit with their hands, flinging peel and stalks,
and so forth into the round openings in the sides of the tables.
I was no loath to follow their example, for I felt thirsty and hungry as I did so I surveyed the hall at my leisure.
And perhaps the thing that struck me most was its dilapidated look.
The stained glass windows, which displayed only a geometrical pattern, were broken in many places,
and the curtains that hung across the lower end were thick with dust,
and it caught my eyes that the corner of the marble table near me was fractured.
Nevertheless, the general effect was extremely rich and picturesque.
There were perhaps a couple of hundred people dining in the hall, and most of them, seated as near to me as they could come,
were watching me with interest, their little eyes shining over the fruit.
They were eating, all were clad in the same soft and yet strong silky material.
Fruit, by and by, was all their diet.
These people of the remote future were strict vegetarians, and while I was with them, in spite of some carnal cravings,
I had to be furgivorous also.
Indeed, I found afterwards that horses, cattle, sheep, dogs had followed the ichthyosaurus into extinction.
But the fruit were very delightful, one in particular that seemed to be in season all the time I was there.
A flurry thing in a three-sided husk was especially good, and I made it my staple.
At first, I was puzzled by all these strange fruit and by the strange flowers I saw, but later I began to perceive their import.
However, I am telling you of my fruit dinner in the distant future now.
So soon as my appetite was little checked, I demonstrated to make a resolute attempt to learn the speech of these new men of mine.
Clearly, that was the next thing to do.
The fruits seemed a convenient thing to begin upon, and holding one of these up, I began a series of interrogative sounds and gestures.
I had some considerable difficulty in conveying my meaning.
At first, my efforts met with a stare of surprise or inexhaustible laughter,
but presently a fair-haired little creature seemed to grasp my intention and repeated a name.
They had to chatter and explain the business at great length to each other.
My first attempt to make these exquisite little sounds of their language caused an immense amount of amusement.
However, I felt like a schoolmaster amidst children, and persisting and presently, I had a score of nouns and sentences at last at my command.
And then I got to demonstrative pronouns and even the verb to eat.
But it was slow work, and the little people soon tired and wanted to get away from my interrogations.
So I determined, rather, of necessity to let them give their lessons in little doses.
When they felt inclined, in very little doses, I found they were before long, for I never met people more indolent or more easily fatigued.
A queer thing I soon discovered about my little hosts, and that was their lack of interest.
They would come to me with eager cries of astonishment, like children, but like children, they would soon stop examining me and wander away after some other toy.
The dinner and my conversational beginnings ended.
I noted for the first time that almost all those who had surrounded me at first were gone.
It is odd, too, how speedily I came to disregard these little people.
I went out through the portal into the sunlit world again.
As soon as my hunger was satisfied, I was continually meeting more of these men of the future, who would follow me a little distance,
chatter and laugh about me, and having smiled and gestulated in a friendly way, leaving me again to my own devices.
The calm of evening was upon the world as I emerged from the great hall, and the scene was lit by the warm glow of the setting sun.
At first, things were very confusing.
Everything was so entirely different from the world I had known, even the flowers.
The big building I had left was situated on the slope of a broad river valley, but the Thames had shifted perhaps a mile from its present position.
I resolved to mount to the summit of a crest, perhaps a mile and a half away, for which I could get a wider view of this hour planet in the year 802,701 AD.
For that, I had explained was the date the little dials of my machine recorded.
As I walked, I was watching for every impression that could possibly help to explain the condition of ruinous splendor in which I found the world.
For ruinous it was. A little way up the hill, for instance, was a great heap of granite, pounded together by masses of aluminum,
a vast labyrinth of perceptuous walls, and crumpled heaps amidst which were thick heaps of very beautiful pagoda-like plants,
nettle possibly, but wonderfully tinted with brown about the leaves, and incapable of stinging.
It was evidently the derelict remains of some vast structure to what end-built I could not determine.
It was here that I was destined, at a later date, to have a very strange experience, the first intimation of a still stranger discovery.
But of that, I will speak in its proper place.
Looking round with a sudden thought from a terrace on which I rested for a while, I realized that there was no small houses to be seen.
Apparently, the single house, and possibly even the household, had vanished.
Here and there among the greenery were place-like buildings, but the house and the cottage, which formed such characteristic features of our own English landscape, had disappeared.
Communism, said I to myself, and on the hills of that came another thought.
I looked at that half-dozen little figures that were following me.
Then, in a flash, I perceived that all had the same form of costume, the same soft, hairless visage, and the same garish, rotundity of limb.
It may seem strange, perhaps, that I had not noticed this before, but everything was so strange.
Now I saw the fact plainly enough, in costume and in all the differences of texture and bearing, that now mark off the sexes from each other.
These people of the future were alike, and the children seemed to my eyes to be but the miniatures of their parents.
I judged, then, that the children of that time were extremely precious physically at least, and I found, afterwards, abundant verification of my opinion.
Seeing the ease and security in which these people were living, I felt that this close resembled of the sexes was, after all, what one would expect, for the strength of a man and the softness of a woman.
The instuation of the family and the defenciations of occupations are more militant necessities of an age of physical force, where population is balanced and abundant much childbearing becomes an evil rather than a blessing to the state.
Where violence comes, but rarely an offspring, are secure. There is less necessity, indeed. There is no necessity for an efficient family, and the specialization of the sexes, where reference to their children's needs disappears.
We see some beginning of this even in our own time, and in this future age, it was complete. This, I must remind you, was my speculation at the time. Later, I was appreciate how far it fell short of the reality.
While I was musing upon these things, my attention was attracted by a pretty little structure, like a well under a copula. I thought, in a transitory way, of the oddness of wells still existing, and then resumed the thread of my speculations.
There were no large buildings towards the top of the hill, and as my walking powers were evidently miraculous, I was presently left alone for the first time with a strange sense of freedom and adventure.
I pushed on up to the crest. There I found a seat of some yellow metal that I did not recognize, corroded in places with a kind of pinkish rust, and half smoothed in soft mass. The armrest cast and filled into the resemblance of griffon's heads.
I sat down on it, and I surveyed the broad view of our old world under the sunset of that long day. It was as sweet and fair a view as I have ever seen.
The sun had already gone below the horizon, and the west was flaming gold, touched with some horizontal bars of purple and crimson. Below was the valley of thames, in which the river lay like a band of burnished steel.
I have already spoken of the great places dotted about among the vegetated greenery, some in ruins and some still occupied. Here and there rose a white or silvery figure in the waste gardens of the earth. Here and there came the sharp vertical line of some cupula or obelisk.
There were no hedges, no signs of propertary rights, no evidence of agriculture. The whole earth had become a garden.
So watching, I began to put my interpretation upon the things I had seen, and as it shaped itself to me that evening, my interpretation was something in this way. Afterwards I found I had got only a half truth, or only a glimpse of one facet of the truth.
It seemed to me that I had happened upon humanity, upon the wane. The ready sunset set me thinking of the sunset of mankind. For the first time I began to realize an odd consequence of the social effort in which we are at present engaged.
And yet come to think it is a logical consequence enough. Strength is the outcome of need. Security sets a premium on feebleness. The work of amelioration, the conditions of life, the true civilizing process that makes life more and more secure had gone steadily onto a climax.
One triumph of a united humanity over nature had followed another. Things that are now mere dreams had become projects deliberately put in hands and carried forward, and the harvest was what I saw.
After all, the sanitation and the agriculture of today are still in the rudimentary stage. The science of our time has attacked but a little department of the field of human disease, but even so it spreads its operations very steadily and persistently.
Our agriculture and horticulture destroy a weed just here and there, and cultivate perhaps a score or so of wholesome plants, leaving the greater number to fight out a balance as they can.
We improve our favorite plants and animals, and how few they are. Gradually, by selective breeding now, a new and better peach, now a speedless grape, now a sweeter and larger flower, now a more convenient breed of cattle.
We improve them gradually, because our ideals are vague and tentative, and our knowledge is very limited, because nature, too, is shy and slow in our clumsy hands.
Someday all this will be better organized, and still better. That is the drift of the current in spite of the eddies. The whole world will be intelligent, educated, and cooperating. Things will move faster and faster towards the subjection of nature.
In the end, wisely and carefully, we shall readjust the balance of animal and vegetable life to suit our human needs.
This adjustment, I say, must have been done and done well. Done, indeed, for all time, in the space of time across which my machine had leaped.
The air was free from gnats, the earth from weeds or fungi. Everywhere were fruits and sweet and delightful flowers. Brilliant butterflies flew hither and thither. The idea of preventive medicine was attained. Diseases had been stamped out.
I saw no evidence of any contagious diseases during all my stay, and I shall have to tell you later that even the process of purification and decay had been profoundly affected by these changes.
Social triumphs, too, had been affected. I saw mankind housed in splendid shelters, gloriously closed, and, as yet, I had found them engaged in no toil.
There were no signs of struggle, neither social nor economical struggle. The shop, the advertisement, traffic, all the commerce which constitutes the body of our world was gone. It was natural on that golden evening that I should jump at the idea of a social paradise.
The difficulty of increasing population had been met, I guessed, and population had ceased to increase. But with this change in condition comes inevitably adaptation to the change.
What, unless biological science is a mass of errors, is the cause of human intelligence and vigor, hardship and freedom, conditions under which the active, strong, and subtle survive, and the weaker go to the wall, conditions that put a premium upon the loyal alliance of capable men upon self-resistant patients.
And decision, and the institution of the family, and the emotions that arise therein, the fierce jealousy, the tenderness for offspring, parental self-devotion, all found their justification and support in the imminent dangers of the young.
Now, where are these imminent dangers? There is a sentiment arising, and it will grow again, convule, jealousy against fierce maternity, against passion of all sorts, unnecessary things now, and things that make us uncomfortable, savage, survivors, dissenters in a refined and pleasant life.
I thought of the cycle, slightness of the people, their lack of intelligence, and those big, abundant ruins, and it strengthened my belief in a perfect conquest of nature.
For after the battle comes quiet. Humanity had been strong, energetic, and intelligent, and had used all its abundant vitality to alter the conditions under which it lived.
And now came the reaction of the altered conditions. Under the new conditions of perfect comfort and security, that restless energy, that with us is strength, would become weakness.
Even in our own time, certain tendencies and desires, once necessary to survival, are a constant source of failure, physical courage, and the love of battle.
For instance, our no great help may even be hindrances to a civilized man, and in a state of physical balance and security power, intelligence as well as physical, would be out of place.
For countless years I judged there had been no danger of war or solitary violence, no danger from wild beasts, nor wasting disease to require strength of constitution, no need of toil.
For such a life, what we should call the weak, are used as well equipped as the strong, are indeed no longer weak. Better equipped indeed they are, for the strong would be fretted by an energy for which there was no outlet.
No doubt the exquisite beauty of the buildings I saw was the outcome of the last surging of the now purposeless energy of mankind before it settled down into perfect harmony with the conditions under which it lived.
The flourish of that triumph which began the last great peace this has ever been the fate of energy and security it takes to art and to erraticism, and then came linger and decay.
Even this artistic impetus would at least die away had almost died in the time I saw. To adorn themselves with flowers, to dance, to sing in the sunlight, so much was left of the artistic spirit and no more.
Even that would fade in the end into a contended inactivity. We are kept keen on the grindstone of pain and necessity, and it seemed to me that here was the hateful grindstone broken at last.
As I stood there in the gathering dark, I thought that in this simple explanation I had mastered the problem of the world, mastered the whole secret of these delicious people, possibly the checks they had devised for the increase of population had succeeded too well and their numbers had rather diminished.
Then kept stationary, that would account for the abundant ruins, very simple was my explanation, and plausible enough as most wrong theories are.